Due to their lack of environment awareness, today's low-altitude fixed-wing Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) are largely limited to primitively follow user-defined waypoints. All high-level decision making is still performed by a human user. Fully-autonomous remote missions in complex environments however require true environment awareness both with respect to terrain and wind. While terrain-relative navigation is already covered in existing literature, the real-time estimation and consideration of complex wind patterns onboard UAVs is a largely untouched topic. However, in complex terrain, strong wind shear and wind speeds that exceed the aircraft maximum airspeed or vertical speed can be present. To allow safe autonomous flight in such conditions, the UAV needs to constantly estimate the 3D wind field around it and consider it in its path planner in real-time.

This paper therefore presents the literature's first-ever local 3D wind field prediction method which can run in real time onboard a UAV. It first provides a review of available numerical weather prediction (NWP) models that fulfill the stringent computation time requirements for onboard computation. The selected method is a simple downscaling approach which retrieves low-resolution weather data from global weather models and then uses potential flow theory to adjust the wind field such that terrain boundaries, mass conservation, and the atmospheric stratification are observed. The method calculates representative 3D wind fields of 1km³ volume in less than 10 seconds. Synthetic test cases such as the flow around a semi-cylinder, through a valley and over a ramp show good qualitative results. A comparison with 3D LIDAR wind data collected over 10 days in the Swiss Alps shows an overall wind error reduction of 23% with respect to the zero-wind assumption that is mostly used for UAV path planning today. 

Overall, this initial research demonstrates the feasibility of real-time 3D wind field prediction onboard a UAV. These results can be used by onboard path planners to calculate safe trajectories through complex terrain. However, the optimization of the method towards onboard execution and thus low computation time means that the vertical wind prediction lacks accuracy. The paper therefore ends with recommendations for future research, including an outlook into high-fidelity real-time 3D wind field prediction through the fusion of Machine Learning methods with Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) methods.


Predicting 3D wind fields in real-time onboard UAVs for flight in complex terrain
Real-time 3D wind field prediction onboard UAVs
Real-time onboard 3D wind field prediction for safe UAV flight in complex terrain
Real-time 3D wind field prediction onboard UAVs for safe flight in complex terrain